# Introduction

In the second volume of this textbook, we elaborate further on technical details of the mechanisms described in the first volume. More on that, we introduce and explain new concepts in the decentralized technologies domain.
In the first section of the book, we focus on decentralization as a phenomenon and examine its implementation in areas that are familiar to the user, such as file-sharing networks (BitTorrent and IPFS) and their content search mechanisms (DHT), user identity management systems (web-of-trust concept) and messengers (using BitMessage as an example). All these technologies are not just stemming from users' inclination to decentralize "everything that could possibly be decentralized" but are rather act as solutions to an array of real threats: censorship, inequality of network participants, single point of failure, the confidentiality of transmitted data, and anonymity of users. Therefore, we show how these mechanisms work and how they solve the tasks at hand.

The accounting systems of the new generation are different in two key areas: cryptographic verification of all the occurring processes as well as direct management of identity, assets, and data via cryptographic keys. Thus, in the second section, we focus on key management mechanisms, the integrity and authenticity of verification mechanisms (e.g., usage of Merkle trees) as well as digital signature mechanisms, which with all their possible variations provide additional properties. Our second section covers the properties that are ensured under these circumstances.

In the third section, we continue to use Bitcoin as an example and consider a number of technical details related to the formats of keys, transactions, and blocks. We also consider issues related to the communication between network nodes, and the principles of updating the protocol in decentralized accounting systems. Using Bitcoin as an example, we will get acquainted with the main classes of potential attacks on such a system. Again, using Bitcoin Script as an example, we will also figure out how the conditions for coins spending can be "programmed".

The fourth section is rather complicated; it describes the technical details of how to construct top-level protocols on top of the accounting system protocol. In this section, we describe how sidechains, Lightning Network, and atomic swaps work. The main goal of all these protocols is the trustless interaction of participants in various accounting systems through the use of hash-time-locked contracts without the need to involve a trusted party.

In the fifth section, we review one of the cornerstones of any accounting system – a consensus algorithm — as well as the problem it deals with: the synchronization of shared history between parties who do not trust each other. We highlight the main approaches to reaching consensus and consider the conditions under which each model can and must work effectively. 
In the sixth section, we deal with the problem of ensuring confidentiality in decentralized accounting systems. The series of CryptoNote standards, which are the basis of many anonymous cryptocurrencies (such as Monero), are being examined in detail. We look at the basic privacy mechanisms used in MimbleWimble and explain the basic concepts lying under zk-SNARKs – non-interactive zero-knowledge proofs.

In the last section, we deal with the development of decentralized accounting systems which have a different set of properties: programmability and the ability to run decentralized applications, the automation of a decentralized exchange and other system components, the mutability and automation of system management processes, and many more.

[ABOUT DISTRIBUTED LAB](https://github.com/distributed-lab/blockchain-and-decentralized-systems-book/blob/main/chapters/volume-2/en/02-about-distributed-lab.md)
