# About Distributed Lab

The mission of Distributed Lab is to build the Financial Internet. We are used to the simplicity of exchanging data over the Internet when it doesn’t matter what is transmitted over the network – videos, text, or images. In the case of financial or accounting data, the technologies are far behind: we still have to deal with a huge amount of paper documents and use inconvenient bank sites and applications that are not compatible with each other (if they are present at all). Hence, the processes related to payments, trading, and management of ownership rights, are slow, cumbersome, inefficient and, moreover, insecure. When we speak about the Financial Internet, we mean a world where all assets are managed using affordable, secure, and open-source software using a uniform protocol.

[Distributed Lab](https://distributedlab.com/) was founded in 2014 as an R&D (research and development) company. We have been working on a wide variety of projects: from digital wallets to banks. All of them were somehow related to the field of accounting and asset management.

At one point, we realized that we ought to spread the news about the bright future for one simple reason: it is impossible to create advanced systems without a proper education focused on the deep understanding of the principles of blockchain and decentralized technologies. That’s how we came up with a cornerstone of building the Financial Internet in 2015—through conducting research and knowledge sharing.

The closest goal is digitization (tokenization) of asset management systems. To make this happen we created [a framework called TokenD](https://tokend.io/)—therefore since 2018, we became entirely a product company. We see our product as a white label processing center for digital assets or, you could say, “Wordpress” for digitization. Our framework is needed to build your own systems faster, cheaper and safer than ever before. It appeared as a consequence of years of work on different projects that, as we then realized, were essentially asking for the same thing. This “thing” is an accounting system that is secure, with wallets for users, a ledger for assets, an internal payment system, an exchange, modules that manage identities, roles, the lifecycle of assets, and gateways for external integrations. Having combined everything mentioned, TokenD allows one to launch a digital asset ecosystem within days for a fraction of the cost of the in-house development.

During the crazy hype period of 2017, we stayed calm and didn’t participate in any ICO while being focused on the search for real business value that blockchain and related technologies can deliver. We decided to commit ourselves to the long journey of transforming the world with technology.

[DECENTRALIZATION AS A PARADIGM IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS](https://github.com/distributed-lab/blockchain-and-decentralized-systems-book/blob/main/chapters/volume-2/en/1-decentralization-as-a-paradigm-in-information-systems.md)
