# Glossary of terms

51% attack—an attack in which a user (or a group of users), who owns the majority of the processing power starts 
censoring transactions and performing a double-spending attack.

Accounting system—a system used to manage all the incomes, expenses, and other financial aspects of a business.

Anonymity—a property that implies the impossibility of authenticating the identity of a certain user.

ASIC (application-specific integrated circuit)—an integrated circuit specialized for solving a specific problem.

Atomic swap—a technology that allows exchanging certain digital currencies without third-parties: the peculiarity of the 
technology is that an exchange is either performed completely and inseparably or not performed at all.

Auditor—a party engaged in the verification of the accounting system. In the context of the blockchain technology, an 
auditor downloads the data from the chain of blocks and verifies the compliance of the end state of an accounting system 
with the transaction history while meeting the protocol rules.

Backdoor—an element intentionally built by a software or hardware developer that allows for unauthorized access in the 
equipment operation, leading to a possibility to control, disrupt the work, steal confidential data, etc.

Balance—a list of incomes and expenses, assets and liabilities in financial reports.

Base58Check encoding—an option for encoding the digital code in the form of alphanumeric text based on the Latin 
alphabet. The encoding alphabet contains 58 symbols.

Bitcoin address—a large unique number obtained from a user's public key through the hash function and used to send and 
receive payments.

Bitcoin coin—a unit of value in the bitcoin currency.

Bitcoin community—a community of people that works on the improvement of the Bitcoin protocol and supports the project 
in general.

Bitcoin Core—a free open-source software which is the basic implementation of the Bitcoin protocol.

Bitcoin currency—an independent decentralized digital currency.

Bitcoin network—a peer-to-peer network of Bitcoin users.

Bitcoin node—a computer with a software running for operation with other computers under the Bitcoin protocol.

Bitcoin protocol—a set of rules which determine how Bitcoin network nodes work and communicate.

Bitcoin Script—a non-Turing-complete language for describing instructions. In Bitcoin, it is used to specify the rules 
for spending coins and meeting these rules.

Bitcoin transaction—a set of digital data that initiates the transfer of bitcoins from one address to another.

Bitcoin wallet—an application or a special device for storing and processing private keys, sending and receiving 
payments, displaying balance and transaction history.

Block—a unit of data that consists of the block header and its body (usually a non-empty transaction list).

Block header—a part of a block that consists of several fields the mandatory of which are a hash value of the previous 
block and a hash value of transactions included in the current one.

Block height—a sequence number of a block in the chain relative to the genesis block.

Blockchain—a technology that describes the data arrangement, which assumes that all the data is grouped into blocks, and 
each block contains a hash value calculated according to the data of the previous block. A chain of blocks is formed in 
such a way that it is impossible to modify the data added to it without being noticed by other participants who also 
maintain it.

Bot—a special program that automatically performs the specified actions through the data networks or program interfaces.

Botnet—a network of nodes with a software installed, which allows coordinating activities of these nodes unknown to 
their owners, for example, to send spam messages.

Capacity—a metric characteristic which reflects the limiting number of passing units (information, objects, volume) per 
unit time through the channel, system, or a node.

Centralized storage service—a service that owns one or more servers for storing data.

Coinbase maturity—a parameter that indicates the minimum number of transaction confirmations in which the validator 
receives a reward.

Coinbase transaction—a special transaction that can only be created by a validator, has zero order and is present in 
each block. It has no input data and denotes the reward for a miner who mined the block.

CoinJoin—a method of combining several payments into a shared transaction that mixes coins and makes it impossible to 
track the history of coin origin.

Coins database (in the context of Bitcoin)—a database that stores the current state of all unspent outputs.

CoinShuffle—a method of mixing coins for increasing user privacy.

Conflicting transactions—two or more transactions that cannot be confirmed simultaneously (in the context of the 
blockchain technology, they cannot be in the same chain).

Consensus—the state of user’s unanimity regarding the transactions that they consider correct.

Cryptocurrency—an independent digital currency in which the management of the following processes is decentralized: 
coin issuance, transaction confirmation, data storage, audit of the accounting system, and governance (decision-making 
about the updates). Anyone can become a member of the system, own the coins, and perform transactions under the 
common-for-all rules.

Darknet—a hidden network where connections are established only between trusted nodes by using specialized protocols and 
ports.

Decentralization—a process of distributing people, authorities, performed calculations, and stored data away from a 
single location or governing body.

Deterministic wallet—a wallet in which all used private keys were generated from a common secret key.

Difficulty (mining complexity parameter)—the field in the block header, which indicates the complexity of mining coins.

Digital key—a digital sequence of a certain length created according to certain rules, often using random number 
generators and calculated from other values through a special algorithm.

Digital signature—a digital analog of a handwritten signature which provides two features: ability to verify the 
authenticity and integrity of the document; this protects the document from being modified or substituted maliciously.

Distributed network node—an individual unit in a decentralized system. It represents a computer of a participant in a 
decentralized system that interacts (communicates) with other participants of the system guided by the protocol rules; 
the node, in this case, performs functions of both a client and a server for other nodes of this network.

Double spending attack—an attack the purpose of which is to send the same coins to two different recipients so that both 
of them accept the payment.

ECDSA (Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm)—a cryptographic algorithm of a digital signature used in Bitcoin to 
ensure that funds can only be spent by their legal owners.

Entropy—the measure of randomness or disorder in a system determining the probability of occurrence of a particular 
symbol or group of symbols in the entire data stream.

Fiat currency – a currency which is not backed with a valuable resource and has the cost set and guaranteed by the 
government.

Firewall—a technological barrier designed to prevent unauthorized or unwanted communication between computer networks or 
hosts.

Fork (in the context of a chain of blocks)—the appearance of several blocks at one height of a particular chain of 
blocks due to either planned or unplanned unsynchronization of the network nodes.

Fork (in the context of software versions)—a process of cloning the source code of a project for further independent 
development.

Full node—a network node that stores all the data of the chain of blocks, transmits them to other nodes and ensures the 
validity and authenticity of added blocks.

Fungibility (interchangeability)—a property that implies that all coins are of the same value and the rules for their 
processing are common for all.

Genesis block—a block (in the chain of blocks) with a zero height. Its peculiarity is that is it not downloaded by the 
network nodes since it is initially implemented into their software.

Hardfork—a protocol change that makes previously invalid blocks and transactions valid.

Hardware wallet—a special device that stores user's private key and can perform certain operations with it.

Hash function—a function for converting an array of input data of arbitrary length into a bit string output of a fixed 
length, which is performed using a certain algorithm.

Issuance (in the context of money)—the process of putting cash or non-cash money into circulation.

Key pair—a private key and a public key, which are used to generate and verify the digital signature respectively.

Ledger—a table (usually digital) which uses performed transactions as a record of changes, where the end state of an 
accounting system is achieved through processing of entire transaction history.

Lightning Network—a method of routing payments securely across multiple P2P bidirectional payment channels.

Liveness—a property that implies an ability for the system to reach consistency even despite the failure of its 
particular components.

LockTime—a mechanism for limiting the confirmation of a transaction until a certain point in time.

Main secret of a wallet—a sequence of bits of a certain length that is commonly used by digital wallets with the 
deterministic key generation or HD wallets.

Mainchain—main (active) chain of blocks.

Mainnet—the main operating network of a decentralized system.

Marketplace (in the context of digital assets)—software and hardware set of organizational, information, and technical 
solutions that ensure the seller-buyer interaction through digital communication channels.

Merchant—a payment service that uses digital currencies and payment systems.

Merkle tree—a full binary tree which has hash values of data blocks in its leaf nodes and in which parent nodes contain 
hash values of a sum of values in the child nodes.

Miner—object or party that is engaged in mining operations. In the context of digital currencies, a miner performs 
computations required to issue new coins.

Mining (in the context of digital currencies)—the computational process required for mining new coins (performing 
issuance) in order to obtain a reward. These computations can have a different nature depending on the protocol of a 
specific currency.

Mining pool—a group of owners of mining equipment, in which there is one leader. The leader creates blocks and 
distributes assignments to all participants in the group. If one of the participants finds a solution, then the reward 
is split between all participants proportional to the capacity of their equipment.

Mnemonic seed phrase—an ordered set of words that can be written down on paper and, if necessary, memorized. It is used 
as a human-readable display of the main secret of a wallet for the purpose of its backup and recovery.

Multisignature address (MultiSig address)—a Bitcoin address from which the coins can only be spent having several pairs 
of ECDSA keys.

Network client—a hardware or software component of the computer system that sends messages (requests) to remote 
computers. Generally, it implements a user interface through which you can access the online services.

Node-validator—a full node of the network of decentralized accounting system used by a validator.

Non-atomic payment—a payment which is performed only through a sequence of separate stages such as withdrawing funds 
from the balance, checking permissions and limits, and remitting funds to another balance.

Off-chain transaction—a transaction which, while not being published on the network, may already be relevant for certain 
network members within a particular system which is superficial for the primary accounting system. The order of 
verification of such a transaction is determined directly by the parties of the transaction.

On-chain transaction—a transaction in the main chain of blocks and, accordingly, must be accepted by the validators of 
the mainchain to be considered confirmed.

P2P (peer-to-peer)—an architecture of a distributed system, where users are the nodes of the network and exchange data 
directly (i.e., without central servers).

P2SH (Pay to Script Hash)—a method of making payments that allows specifying the conditions for spending coins by using 
the hash value of the script, rather than its public data.

Payment channel—a method of performing multiple payments without adding transactions to a shared database (for example, 
a chain of blocks). To open/close a payment channel, counterparties must perform an opening/closing on-chain 
transaction.

Payment system—any system which is used to manage financial operations and includes a set of rules, procedures and 
technical infrastructure that ensure the transfer of value from one economic entity to another.

Permissioned—a property of a process, which implies that a party cannot take part in it without having an appropriate 
permission.

Permissionless—a property of a process which implies that any party can take part in it, without having to have any 
permission.

Persistence—an ability of a system to maintain its properties unassisted.

Privacy—a property of information meaning that specific data is not available to unauthorized entities.

Private key (secret key)—a key (in asymmetric cryptographic systems) designed to encrypt messages and is only known to 
its owner.

Proof of coin ownership—a set of data that the initiator of a transaction forms to prove that specific coins belong to 
him.

Public key—a key (in public key cryptosystems) from the user's key pair, which is known to everyone.

Segregated Witness—the Bitcoin protocol update, in which the proof of coin ownership is stored separately from the 
primary data of a transaction.

Serialization—the process of translating any data structure into one sequence of bits (bytes) of data. The 
deserialization (structuring) is the operation opposite to serialization.

Sidechain—a separate chain of blocks associated with the main (parent) chain; the processing rules of sidechain may 
differ from the rules for processing the parent chain.

Simplified Payment Verification (SPV)—a method that allows the client to verify that a transaction is confirmed 
(included in the block) without having to download the entire transaction history and performing its verification. For 
its verification, the SPV client only needs to download the block headers, which are much smaller in size than full 
blocks.

Softfork—a protocol change in which previously valid blocks and transactions become invalid for the nodes with updated 
software.

Software wallet—an application that processes keys and transactions, connects to the payment network through trusted 
nodes, centralized services or is a network node itself.

Testnet—a network for testing the protocol updates.

Timestamping (anchoring)—a property that indicates the binding of some message to a specific point in time and the 
ability to verify this binding for validity.

Token (in the context of digital assets)—a unit of accounting that is used to represent a digital balance of an owner of 
some asset in an accounting system.

Transaction (in the context of blockchain)—a digital statement that is certified by an author and initiates the transfer 
of coins from one address to another.

Transaction confirmation—the process of verifying the transaction by node-validators and including it in the block.

Transaction ID (txid, wtxid)—the hash value of all transaction fields.

Transaction malleability—an attack that allows a malicious person to change the unique identifier of a Bitcoin 
transaction before its confirmation on the network.
Transaction verification—the process of verifying the correctness of the input data to publish the transaction to the 
network.

Trusted node—a full node of the Bitcoin network to which a particular user trusts the verification of their 
transactions.

Trustless—the property of a system that implies the lack of necessity to trust the system concerning the processes of 
storing and processing certain data.

Untraceability—the inability to assign a certain actions to a certain user in the network.

UTXO (unspent transaction output)—an unspent output, which can be used as an input of the next transaction.

Validator—a participant of the accounting system, which performs full verification of transactions and directly takes 
part in their confirmation. If the accounting system is blockchain-based, then validators are those who create the 
blocks.

Verification—the process of checking data for compliance with the protocol rules.

WIF (Wallet Import Format)—a method of encoding an ECDSA private key to have it copied.

Witness (witness data)—a set of proofs of coin ownership that are excluded from the main part of the transaction.

Zero-knowledge proof (ZKP)—a cryptographic proof of knowledge of a secret without its disclosure.

[ACKNOWLEDGMENTS](https://github.com/distributed-lab/blockchain-and-decentralized-systems-book/blob/main/chapters/volume-1/en/11-acknowledgements.md)   
