# INTRODUCTION

This is the final volume of the book about blockchain and decentralized systems. Being a logical follow-up to the previous volumes, it covers the fundamental topics that were not examined (or only partially examined) previously.

The first section is dedicated to decentralization as an approach to system organization. We examine the principles and architecture of mesh networks, the details of existing protocols for organizing such networks, and the opportunities for their development and use. A separate subsection covers the organization of digital identity systems – one of the most important components, which is the core of the security of digital user interaction. Next, we examine the existing approaches and systems for conducting e-voting, as well as the perspectives for the introduction of such systems today. Separate subsections are dedicated to organizational methods of decentralized exchanges and auctions.

In the second section, we discuss one of the most promising advances in accounting systems (and in the Bitcoin protocol in particular). A lot of people have heard about Schnorr signatures and many are intrigued by the features that this signature scheme can provide. In this section, we examined the details of the Schnorr signatures, multisignature implementation methods, and methods for protecting from an attack to which an unmodified protocol is vulnerable. Also, we show the protocol features, which are based on the discussed material.

In the third section of the book, we consider methods for ensuring the scalability of accounting systems. We describe the basic principles underlying off-chain protocols, the features of systems using sharding technology, as well as the method of organizing the history of events in the form of a directed acyclic graph. We analyze the advantages and disadvantages of each of the technologies, as well as the possibilities of using them in various types of accounting systems and the features of the existing, functioning systems that already apply these approaches in practice.

There is a very famous phrase: “On the Internet, nobody knows that you are a dog”. Though, the actual situation is not so bright. Many interested parties spend a lot of effort, money, and time on getting up-to-date information on the actions of Internet users. Therefore, our fourth section is devoted to the description of privacy mechanisms on the Web. We examine how Tor and the Invisible Internet Project work, what onion and garlic routing are, and how decentralized anonymous instant messengers (like Tox, which we exemplify) can work. A separate section is devoted to steganographic methods of hiding information.

In the fifth section, we focus on methods for ensuring privacy which, however, have completely different features and purposes. Using cryptographic commitments as an example and using them in zero-knowledge proof schemes, we show how to hide sensitive data from network participants while allowing events to be verified – any network participant can verify that everything follows the protocol, but at the same time, the participant will not be able to access particular data.

The sixth section is devoted to quantum computing and post-quantum cryptographic algorithms. When writing the section, we did not set the goal to explain quantum mechanics at the level of a specialized training program – for fear that the third volume of the book would be the beginning of a multi-volume textbook on quantum computing. Instead, we offer a general idea of what a qubit is, what mathematical model it uses, and how to work with it. We hope that such an approach will provide readers with a basic understanding of quantum computing for further study of this promising area.

# [ABOUT DISTRIBUTED LAB](https://github.com/distributed-lab/blockchain-and-decentralized-systems-book/blob/main/chapters/volume-3/en/0.2-About-Distributed-Lab.md)
